docs: Yellow paper rollup circuits and state update (#3558)
AztecProtocol/aztec-packages: yellow-paper/docs/rollup-circuits/root_rollup.md

---
title: Root Rollup
sidebar_position: 4
---

> The root rollup circuit is our top circuit, it apply the state changes passed through its children and the cross-chain messages. It is the one that will communicate with the [validating light node](./../contracts/index.md). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The root rollup circuit is our top circuit, it applies the state changes passed through its children and the cross-chain messages. It is the one that will communicate with the [validating light node](./../contracts/index.md). 
```

:::info Squishers
This might practically happen through a series of "squisher" circuits that will wrap the proof in another proof that is cheaper to verify on-chain. For example, wrapping a ultra-plonk proof in a standard plonk proof.
:::

> Since the output (public inputs) you will see some overlap with the `ProvenBlock` which is what a node must receive together with a proof to progress the chain. More on this will be covered in the [cross-chain communication](./../contracts/index.md) section.

Author: The refer to another doc or sentence in here?

---
title: Root Rollup
sidebar_position: 4
---

> The root rollup circuit is our top circuit, it applies the state changes passed through its children and the cross-chain messages. Essentially, it is the last step that allow us to prove that the state transition function $\mathcal{T}(S, B) \mapsto S'$ was applied correctly for a state $S$ and a block $B$. Note, that while its public inputs might not be the block itself, it have commitments to the. Provided with the block (`ProvenBlock`) and proof, a node is able to derive the public inputs from the block and his state and then execute the proof against the values derived. If the proof is passing, the block is valid and the state progression is correct.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The root rollup circuit is our top circuit, it applies the state changes passed through its children and the cross-chain messages. Essentially, it is the last step that allows us to prove that the state transition function $\mathcal{T}(S, B) \mapsto S'$ was applied correctly for a state $S$ and a block $B$. Note, that the root rollup circuit's public inputs do not comprise all of the underlying data of a block, because the proof would be too costly to verify. Instead, the public inputs are commitments to the block's underlying data. Given a `ProvenBlock`(see below) a node can extract the root rollup's public inputs the block's state changes. Given the root rollup's proof and this extracted data, a node can verify the proof. If proof verifcation passes, the block is valid and the state progression is correct.
```

Perhaps provide a link to where $\mathcal{T}$ is defined, elsewhere in the yellow paper?

```mermaid
graph LR

> A[RootRollupInputs] --> C[RootRollupCircuit] --> B[RootRollupPublicInputs] --> D[ProvenBlock] --> E[Node]

Reviewer 2: Maybe differentiate the colours of data, a program, and an entity?

class Body {
    l1ToL2Messages: List~Fr~
}
Body *-- "m" TxEffect

class ProvenBlock { 
    archive: Snapshot
}

ProvenBlock *-- Header : header
ProvenBlock *-- Body : body

class ConstantRollupData {
  last_archive: Snapshot
  base_rollup_vk_hash: Fr,
  merge_rollup_vk_hash: Fr,
}
ConstantRollupData *-- GlobalVariables : globalVariables

class BaseOrMergeRollupPublicInputs {
    type: Fr
    height_in_block_tree: Fr
    aggregation_object: AggregationObject
    txs_hash: Fr[2]
    out_hash: Fr[2]
}
BaseOrMergeRollupPublicInputs *-- ConstantRollupData : constants
BaseOrMergeRollupPublicInputs *-- PartialStateReference : start
BaseOrMergeRollupPublicInputs *-- PartialStateReference : end

class ChildRollupData {
    proof: Proof
}
ChildRollupData *-- BaseOrMergeRollupPublicInputs: inputs

class RootRollupInputs { 
    l1_to_l2_msgs_tree: Snapshot
    l1_to_l2_msgs: List~Fr~
    l1_to_l2_msgs_sibling_path: List~Fr~

    archive_sibling_path: List~Fr~
}
RootRollupInputs *-- ChildRollupData: left
RootRollupInputs *-- ChildRollupData: right

class RootRollupPublicInputs {
    aggregation_object: AggregationObject
    archive: Snapshot
}
RootRollupPublicInputs *--Header : header
```

> ### Validity Conditions

Reviewer 2: Similar suggestion to bullet-point the stuff that this circuit does, for quick parsing.
